src/beginners-guide/systemctl-part-01.md, before:

# Beginners guide to systemctl (Part 1): Services

For an operating system to... *operate* it needs a couple of other programs running that can help it with the odd job. Applications that run in the background and take care of some logic and legwork to sustain what we call a modern operating system. Services like a network or bluetooth manager application, a print spool manager, policy manager, secret key manager and so on, and so forth. These background applications are what we call `services`.  `Systemd` manages services, among other things. This is done through the `systemctl` tool. To run it you'll need to crack open your favourite terminal (**gnome-terminal**), probably by pressing the superkey and writing "terminal" in the activities menu. Once you've got the terminal open let's check which services we have running.

```bash
systemctl --type service
```

![seq01.gif](../../dist/assets/seq01.gif)

This will open up an overview of services that are currently loaded or that have failed. To browse the list use the keyboard arrow down to move further down the list and the left arrow key to see what the descriptions of the services are. From here we can see all the usual suspects, like `polkit.service`, `gdm.service` and in the case of *Pop!_OS_* you have `system76-power.service`. Let's take a look at that particular service by using the command:

```bash
systemctl status system76-power.service
```

![seq02.gif](../../dist/assets/seq02.gif)

Here we can see everything is fine. It's been loaded from `/etc/systemd/system/system76-power.service`, it's *enabled*, *active* *and* *running*. You can also see the "Process ID" (or "PID"), number of tasks, memory usage and even cgroup membership. We also see a snippet from the log of this particular service. Everything looks peachy keen, but if we scroll down we see that there's a problem with the service `grub-initrd-fallback.service`.  So we use the same command (`systemctl status`) but replace `system76-power.service` with `grub-initrd-fallback.service` to see what's going on with that particular service.

![seq03.gif](../../dist/assets/seq03.gif)

As we can see here `grub-initrd-fallback.service` is not a happy camper. It has been **loaded**, but it isn't **active** and didn't **end properly**. This means that it was meant to be loaded with the system, the unit is technically active, but the process crashed because of some failure. In the log we can see that it has en error where the process can't find the file `/boot/grub/grubenv.new`. As it so happens I know this is because I installed some `grub` packages for testing purposes that I don't really need, since I use `systemd-boot`! Therefore, in this case I can safely ignore this error, quite possibly consider removing said packages and move on with checking out my services. But what if I have more errors? Let's return to the first command, but add an extra qualifier to it.

```bash
systemctl --type service --state failed
```

Here we introduce a new property. **State** can be several things depending upon the unit, but in this case we're looking for `failed services`. I can make the command even shorter by doing the shorthand:

```bash
systemctl --type service --failed
```

Both these commands will yield the same result, in my case being:

![scrnsht01.png](../../dist/assets/scrnsht01.png)

Here we can see that I have two services that aren't functioning properly. Both `grub-initrd-fallback.service` and `vboxweb.service` have failed! I'm one saaaaaad panda. As it stands I'm not using `grub` nor `virtualbox` for the moment, so I have no cares to give here. I think I'll just disable `vboxweb.service`so that it doesn't give me anymore errors. Disabling `grub-initrd-fallback.service` is ill-advised, unless you know what you're doing (like me!)

```bash
sudo systemctl disable vboxweb.service
```

I use `sudo` because you need administrative priveliges, but if you forget to write it you'll get a password popover prompt instead - so no stress!

![seq04.gif](../../dist/assets/seq04.gif)

That might cause some headscratching once I try to run `virtualbox` again, but then again maybe I should move to `gnome-boxes` (available to install)? Depends. Actually, you know what? Let's get it working - so I'm gonna try to run it *without* enabling it.

Commit message:

Added new gif for ● vboxweb.service - VirtualBox Web Service      Loaded: loaded (/lib/systemd/system/vboxweb.service; enabled; vendor preset: enabled)      Active: failed (Result: protocol) since Mon 2020-12-28 09:37:57 CET; 17min ago     Process: 937 ExecStart=/usr/lib/virtualbox/vboxweb-service.sh start (code=exited, status=0/SUCCESS)
des. 28 09:37:57 montesquieu systemd[1]: Starting VirtualBox Web Service...
des. 28 09:37:57 montesquieu systemd[1]: vboxweb.service: Can't open PID file /run/vboxweb.pid (yet?) after start: Operation not permitted
des. 28 09:37:57 montesquieu systemd[1]: vboxweb.service: Failed with result 'protocol'.
des. 28 09:37:57 montesquieu systemd[1]: Failed to start VirtualBox Web Service. - considering rewrite of half the page to make it more focused

src/beginners-guide/systemctl-part-01.md, after:

# Beginners guide to systemctl (Part 1): Services

For an operating system to... *operate* it needs a couple of other programs running that can help it with the odd job. Applications that run in the background and take care of some logic and legwork to sustain what we call a modern operating system. Services like a network or bluetooth manager application, a print spool manager, policy manager, secret key manager and so on, and so forth. These background applications are what we call `services`.  `Systemd` manages services, among other things. This is done through the `systemctl` tool. To run it you'll need to crack open your favourite terminal (**gnome-terminal**), probably by pressing the superkey and writing "terminal" in the activities menu. Once you've got the terminal open let's check which services we have running.

```bash
systemctl --type service
```

![seq01.gif](../../dist/assets/seq01.gif)

This will open up an overview of services that are currently loaded or that have failed. To browse the list use the keyboard arrow down to move further down the list and the left arrow key to see what the descriptions of the services are. From here we can see all the usual suspects, like `polkit.service`, `gdm.service` and in the case of *Pop!_OS_* you have `system76-power.service`. Let's take a look at that particular service by using the command:

```bash
systemctl status system76-power.service
```

![seq02.gif](../../dist/assets/seq02.gif)

Here we can see everything is fine. It's been loaded from `/etc/systemd/system/system76-power.service`, it's *enabled*, *active* *and* *running*. You can also see the "Process ID" (or "PID"), number of tasks, memory usage and even cgroup membership. We also see a snippet from the log of this particular service. Everything looks peachy keen, but if we scroll down we see that there's a problem with the service `grub-initrd-fallback.service`.  So we use the same command (`systemctl status`) but replace `system76-power.service` with `grub-initrd-fallback.service` to see what's going on with that particular service.

![seq03.gif](../../dist/assets/seq03.gif)

As we can see here `grub-initrd-fallback.service` is not a happy camper. It has been **loaded**, but it isn't **active** and didn't **end properly**. This means that it was meant to be loaded with the system, the unit is technically active, but the process crashed because of some failure. In the log we can see that it has en error where the process can't find the file `/boot/grub/grubenv.new`. As it so happens I know this is because I installed some `grub` packages for testing purposes that I don't really need, since I use `systemd-boot`! Therefore, in this case I can safely ignore this error, quite possibly consider removing said packages and move on with checking out my services. But what if I have more errors? Let's return to the first command, but add an extra qualifier to it.

```bash
systemctl --type service --state failed
```

Here we introduce a new property. **State** can be several things depending upon the unit, but in this case we're looking for `failed services`. I can make the command even shorter by doing the shorthand:

```bash
systemctl --type service --failed
```

Both these commands will yield the same result, in my case being:

![scrnsht01.png](../../dist/assets/scrnsht01.png)

Here we can see that I have two services that aren't functioning properly. Both `grub-initrd-fallback.service` and `vboxweb.service` have failed! I'm one saaaaaad panda. As it stands I'm not using `grub` nor `virtualbox` for the moment, so I have no cares to give here. I think I'll just disable `vboxweb.service`so that it doesn't give me anymore errors. Disabling `grub-initrd-fallback.service` is ill-advised, unless you know what you're doing (like me!)

```bash
sudo systemctl disable vboxweb.service
```

I use `sudo` because you need administrative priveliges, but if you forget to write it you'll get a password popover prompt instead - so no stress!

![seq04.gif](../../dist/assets/seq04.gif)

As you can see the way `systemd` adds or removes services from being **enabled** or **disabled** is by linking files from the `systemd` service library (probably from `/usr/lib/systemd/system`) to the systemd `/etc/systemd/system` folder - in this case the `multi-user-target-wants` folder (more on that in an upcoming guide).

![seq05.gif](/home/thorhop/Documents/Pop!_Planet/pop-guide/dist/assets/seq05.gif)

Well, it seems the `pid` file (basically a "lock file" that says that an application is running) is not writable by the service. This seems like it can be an oversight during installation or that I am not inside of a group.1
